# Automated Headless Browser Testing

### **Headless Browser**

We know that the User Interface or UI of any software is its most integral part. So, when it comes to Headless Browsers it means a browser without a user interface or “head.” So, when the browser is headless, the GUI is hidden. Therefore, when you use a headless browser to access any website, you can’t see anything. However, the program runs in the background.

A headless browser is similar to a normal browser that performs functions such as navigating pages, clicking links, downloading content, and many more. But, with a normal browser, you can check each step and proceed with the help of a GUI presentation. At the same time, you will use Command-line or Console Interface to keep track of changes.

### **Headless testing**

"Headless testing means that an application is tested without seeing its graphical interface. Headless testing can be performed for the case of web applications with browsers that can run without the GUI layer (i.e. talking directly to the browser/render engines), or for the case of mobile applications with emulators that run without the graphical interface.

One of the benefits of headless testing is that it facilitates test automation in cloud mode, and continuous integration engines that run without GUI. On the other hand, it reduces resource consumption by avoiding interaction with middleware to run the system under test (e.g., a browser with GUI). By using browsers and emulators in headless mode, the overhead (in memory and processor) involved in the browser/emulator interface layer is reduced; in the case of headless testing for WEB applications, it avoids invoking the browser's graphic component and talks directly to the browser engines (browser + render engine).

### **Unit testing**

Assert that one piece of your app is working the way you expect.

### **Integration testing**

Make sure that multiple 'units' work together correctly

### Needed packages

**Jest**

Will help us to run tests and make assertions about the way our application is behaving.

**Puppeteer**

Will help us to launch a Chromium instance and interact with it from JS code that we write.

# Functions factories

Generate variables needed to run certain tests. For example:

- `sessionFactory()` allows to create a session token and its signature, then returns an object with those values.
- `userFactory()` - allows to create a new user and store it in the DB everytime a test is run.

To create a new user the User model from mongoose is needed. However, jest only runs the `*.test.js` files, that means it doesn't anything about the environment and the other stuff in the server. So it won't know the User model, among other stuff.

In order to allow Jest to know about the DB and the User model, we setup that stuff in a new file, in this project the file is the `./project/test/setup.js` and in inside it we create the connection to the DB and call the User model.

Finally in the `package.json` we add this code in the root part:

    "jest": {
      "setupTestFrameworkScriptFile": "./test/setup.js"
    },

to set up Jest with the stuff we need to execute the tests correctly.

## Refactor code even more using a Proxy

See `./project/test/helpers/page.js`

We created the `CustomPage` class were we add some custom methods an return a proxy which gets and combines the methods from `puppeteer.browser`, `puppeteer.page` and the `CustomPage` class itself.

A useful method from this class is the `login()` which uses the function factories and other logic to refactor the code and generate cleaner tests.

## Describe()

Allows to have tests or other `describe()` statements inside of it. And also `beforeEach()` and `afterEach()`.

# Advanced Test Helpers

We made the `execRequests(actions)` method which accepts an array of objects, each object has the properties method, path and data. The function iterates through the actions array and does an http request according to the method.

So basically we can test a lot of routes fast and easily.
